# Module 1 Challenge - Fintech Case Study

# TALA Case Study

## Overview and Origin

Tala is an up-and-coming Fintech company that offers digital financial services to the underbanked and underrepresented in emerging markets such as the Philippines, Mexico, Kenya and India. According to their company website, it is most known for underwriting and disbursing loans to people who have never had formal credit history. Based on Crunchbase, this company was incorporated October 1st, 2011, and was solely founded by Shivani Siroya, who currently serves as the CEO. In her interview with podcast Found.Live (affiliated with Tech Crunch) she states that her idea for the company came about when she realized that many people in emerging markets don’t have access to formal financial services. In most of these countries, credit bureaus don’t exist, which in turn leads to individuals without credit history. She believed there had to be a way for these underserved individuals to obtain loans without having the traditional credit history that can be seen in developed markets. Tala used venture capital to help fund its company. According to Crunchbase, Tala is funded by 38 investors, most notably Paypal Ventures and Lowercase Capital. It has raised a total of $389.4M in funding over 12 rounds, with their latest funding being on November 9th, 2021 from a Venture – Series Unknown round. As of October 14th, 2021, Tala has a post-money valuation in the range of $1B to $10B. 

## Business Activities

As mentioned before, the financial problem that Tala is trying to fix is to give access to customers, in emerging markets, loans that they can borrow for their financial needs. She mentions that 2.5 billion individuals around the world lack the access to financial services, which include access to loans. Reason being again, is that credit bureaus don’t exist in these countries. According to Shivani’s interview with podcast Found.Live, credit bureaus in some countries like the Philippines don’t exist since national ID systems aren’t in place. In the Philippines, they are 17 different forms of ID that are accepted. This makes it harder for individuals to walk into a bank to get a loan as the process to verify their identity becomes time consuming. Also, in most of these countries, most of the transactions are cash based which makes it difficult also to verify a person’s credit history. The companies then intended target are individuals in these emerging markets that don’t have a valid credit history to receive loans and other financial services. As mentioned in the beginning, they currently serve the Philippines, Mexico, Kenya and India, with hopes in the future to serve the other approximate 2 billion individuals in these emerging markets. 

According to TechCrunch, the solution that Tala provides to individuals in these markets is an Android application that you can download on your phone which tracks the users’ phone data and their activity (for instance, the frequency and timeliness of paying phone bills) to create credit scores that determine the amount of credit a user can receive. The user can receive from a range from $10 - $500. Most of the other competitors that have been researched currently don’t have a sole mobile application that uses automatic machine learning to collect data and determine an adequate credit score of the user. To top this off, the unfair advantage that Tala has introduced to its financial services recently are banking services such as opening a checking or savings account within the app. According to Shivani’s interview with Fintech TV, the company has recently partnered with Visa, Circle and Stellar. With this partnership, the company is moving beyond credit and offering their customers the ability to deposit, save, and earn(yield) their money with Tala. Along with their services, they also provided their customers the ability to purchase cryptocurrencies and send money to others using that technology.

Tala uses many different technologies to run its mobile applications. According to Dealroom.co, some considerable ones include Android, Amazon Web Services, Python, JavaScript and MySQL. The Android platform is used to display and upload their mobile application for users to download and use. Amazon Web Services is used for cloud computing to store large amounts of information including data, software and applications. Python and JavaScript was used to create the backend development used to run the mobile application. Finally, MySQL is used to collect and store the customers’ user data and their financial activity.

## Landscape

As you can already tell, Tala is part of the lending domain in the financial industry. There has been many major trends and innovations in financial lending in the last 5-10 years. One example according to The Financial Brand are payment solutions such as the Buy Now, Pay Later (BNPL) solution. This model allows for customers to purchase an item now but able to finance and pay the item over a period. This innovation had forced traditional banks and competing payment providers to play catch-up. This model has impacted credit card and personal loan industries. Another innovation seen over the last 5-10 years includes the digital lending industry. There has been an emergence of specialized lenders that can process mortgages, auto loans, personal loans, student loans and even credit cards far more efficiently than in the past. This has led to a shift of market share away from traditional banks to fintech players that focus on experience, modern technology, and low-cost acquisition models to deliver digital loans at scale. Also, they could deliver approvals in seconds and close loans in a fraction of the time, which avoids physical interaction and creates loyalty. 

Some or the largest companies in the Buy Now, Pay Later space include Klarna, Afterpay and Affirm. As mentioned, you can purchase almost anything online through retail stores such as Target, Walmart and other online stores without having to pay the item in full at time of purchase. Also, Apple has released the Apple Card that includes one feature where you can purchase an Apple product and finance it with 0% interest. That’s free money you can borrow to purchase an Apple product immediately. Some of the major players in the digital lending space, according to Empirica Software include Sofi, Lending Club and AVANT. SoFi offers student loan refinancing, personal loans and mortgages to young borrowers with high-end jobs and degrees. Lending Club operates an online lending platform that enables borrowers to obtain a loan and investors to purchase notes backed by payments made on loans. AVANT makes instant online loans of $1000 to $35,000 to retail customers at 10% to 36% interest for two to five years. 

## Results

Tala has been widely successful thus far in providing its services to its customers. According to TechCrunch, more than 6 million customers across the Philippines, Mexico, Kenya and India use Tala and it claims to have disbursed over $2.7 billion worth of credit since its inception. Also, it states that about 12,000 new users are signing up every day to access credit. CNBC mentions that Tala charges a one-time fee as low as 5% for each loan and that more than 90% of its customers repay their loan within 20 to 30 days, with most being recurring customers. Some of the core metrics that companies in this domain use to measure success includes loan origination, loan servicing, and default servicing performance metrics. Tala states that their approval duration for most of their loans is within a day max which is efficient as most loans are approved with 24 – 72 hours. As mentioned before that have serviced about 6 million customers, lending about $2.7 billion worth of credit. In 2019, they received an estimated revenue of more than $100 million from servicing their loans. Finally, as mentioned, their repayment rates are above 90% with more than 95% of their first-time borrowers returning for additional loans. 

Some of the companies that compete with Tala include FundFina, Kissht and PayJoy. FundFina is a digital lending company that provides loans to small businesses mainly in India. Kissht is like Tala, in which they provide personal loans to its customers. Also, the company services its customers mainly in India. PayJoy would be Tala’s biggest competitor as it provides personal loans as well, to its customers in Mexico but also provides a financing program for its customers to purchase Android mobile phones at an affordable rate. Now all these companies are performing successfully in their markets, however the advantage that Tala has to its competitors is that it has a bigger market share, spanning in four countries with hopes to expand to other emerging markets. Tala dominates customer acquisition compared to FundFina’s 1 million customers in India and PayJoy’s half a million customers in Mexico. However, Kissht does have an edge in the number of customers registered as it currently holds 16 million users in India. All in all, Tala has the most diverse customer base by servicing in more than one emerging market. 

## Recommendations

There are two services that I suggest Tala to use in their operations. First, just like their competitor Kissht, they should provide credit card services to its users that they can implement in their everyday financial activity.  I think this service would hugely benefit Tala because they can have an extra metric, they can use to collect data. They can then use this data to implement a credit score that shows the creditworthiness of each customer which can make it easier for the company to offer precise loan amounts when a customer applies for one. They can partner up with Visa or Mastercard and implement the technologies that these credit card companies offer to service Tala’s credit cards to its customers. Its appropriate to use Visa and Mastercard’s technologies as they are well established and with help Tala rollout this credit card service quicker. I would also suggest for them to maybe come up with their own credit card technology that they can then run their own established credit cards that its customers can use. 

Tala currently offers customers the ability to buy cryptocurrencies within its mobile app. However, something that most other companies that specialize in cryptocurrencies offer is the ability to stake or yield their cryptocurrencies. This is a service that I suggest Tala to bring on as it offers an extra way for customers to make money aside from yields on savings account. It would benefit Tala as the use of cryptocurrencies in these markets, to their full potential, can contribute to a mass adoption of cryptocurrencies as the future is huge. This can also help compete with companies that offer these services in developed countries such as Coinbase and FTX. The technology used in these services would be blockchain technology, which is still relatively new in terms of mass adoption and has endless potential. All in all, Tala is a great example of a company that is helping underserved and underrepresented customers in emerging markets catch up to customers in developed countries. With so many customers in emerging markets, the opportunities and growth for Tala are endless. 

## Addendum

1)Tala Official Website: https://tala.co/

2)CNBC-CNBC Disruptor 50, Tala, fintech for the underbanked, raises $145 million to expand globally and into crypto: https://www.cnbc.com/2021/10/14/tala-fintech-for-unbanked-raises-145-million-for-global-crypto.html

3)CrunchBase-Tala: https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/inventure

4)TechCrunch-Tala grabs $145M to offer more financial services in emerging markets: https://techcrunch.com/2021/10/14/tala-grabs-145m-to-offer-more-financial-services-in-emerging-markets/

5)YouTube-Found Live featuring Tala founder Shivani Siroya: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hfaO17rv0Q0

6)YouTube-Shivani Siroya, Founder & CEO at Tala-FINTECH TV: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ccUn5fGdl7I

7)FundFina Official Website: https://www.fundfina.com/

8)Kissht Official Website: https://kissht.com/

9)PayJoy Official Website: https://www.payjoy.com/about

10)DealRoom.co-Tala: https://app.dealroom.co/companies/tala_formerly_inventure_

11)The Financial Brand-8 Fintech Trends Changing Banking Forever: https://thefinancialbrand.com/117459/digital-banking-fintech-transformation-trends-payments-technology-marketing/

12)Empirica Software-Top Fintech Companies in the Lending Space: https://thefinancialbrand.com/117459/digital-banking-fintech-transformation-trends-payments-technology-marketing/
